well as gaza's Medical Teams fight to
treat the thousands wounded by Israel's
military operation the need to
prioritize has become essential that
means precious little care for those who
were critically ill before October 7th
as you're about to see evacuating cancer
patients from gaza's hospitals poses
considerable risks but in the current
climate there's almost no
alternative families wait for hours at
gaza's Southern Rafa Crossing
hoping to get a seat on the next bus
into
Egypt foreigners and Palestinian Jewel
Nationals are permitted to leave
Gaza and now some gazen cancer patients
are being offered an opportunity to
travel to Turkey for
treatment but the process is not
straightforward for
everyone I've been left without
treatment for over a month doctors
provided me with a document to travel to
Turkey to take merely one injection and
return to Gaza as the hospital doesn't
have the injection when I arrived at the
Crossing I was told that my name is not
on the list and I may return tomorrow or
they'll call
me two planes carrying cancer patients
landed in anchora from Egypt following
negotiations between the Turkish and
Egyptian
authorities Egypt has also accepted a
limited amount of medical
evacuees gaza's remaining hospitals are
running out of medical supplies and
fuel here in hian yunes they have to
treat patients by torch
light most doctors now have to
prioritize a Emergency Care over
patients with other health conditions
but evacuating patients is not an easy
process the World Health Organization
says the options are limited to evacuate
patients from gaza's largest hospital
alifa in Gaza City following a raid on
the hospital by Israeli
military to organize a medical
evacuation uh such as this in such an
insecure setting uh is very very
complicated
uh firstly you need to secure uh
security guarantees and safe passage for
any Convoy um negotiations with the
Israeli Defense Forces are being managed
uh through uh the UN offices who does
not do the direct negotiation on those
issues um so uh the office for
coordination of humanitarian assistance
uh manages that element of uh of the
evacuation process then you we have to
prioritize the patients who who would be
moved first uh so we'd be looking at the
most critically ill and again those
theat evacuating patients from gaza's
hospitals poses considerable risks but
staying put could be the more
life-threatening
alternative for more let's bring in
Shaya low here she works for the
Norwegian Refugee Council and is
monitoring developments from Jerusalem
first of all shanana tell us what you
are hearing from from the alifa hospital
there in Northern
Gaza well we aren't hearing much of
anything from Gaza right now because
since about 400 p.m. yesterday there's
been a Communications blackout so we are
just in the dark as much as anyone
else's at this point we did have staff
at El shifa as recently as last week who
were seeking shelter there but they fled
about a week ago uh and and made their
way further south now the Gaza Strip uh
as you know is home to over 2 million
people it's now a war zone thousands
have been killed tens of thousands
injured there what's left of the health
care infrastructure in the Gaza
Strip well we've been warning for weeks
about the imminent collapse of the the
Health Care system in Gaza and it seems
like we are there uh I believe uh only a
handful of hospitals are still uh
operational in Gaza we're also of course
because people are in such Close
Quarters do not have access to proper
clean water uh showers we're seeing the
spread of diseases uh and and illness so
on top of the fact that the hospitals
are overwhelmed taking care of people
who have been injured uh people with
chronic conditions or people with
preventable communicable diseases are
now going to be overwhelming what's left
of the Health Care
System you work with a refugee
organization ation the Norwegian Refugee
Council uh talk to us about the
displaced people in Gaza now because
many from the north have moved to the
South but in the South it's not really
safe either I
understand no it hasn't been safe uh in
the South we're hearing up up until
yesterday we were hearing daily reports
from our colleagues about air strikes
happening in the center in south of Gaza
uh we had colleagues who have been
injured and had members of their Ames be
killed in these air strikes including
one of our colleagues AAL who lost her
her only child a seven-year-old boy in
an air strike on Rafa about 3 four weeks
ago uh it's really there simply is no
safe place to seek shelter in Gaza and
then on top of that you have an area
that really doesn't have the capacity to
support all those internally displaced
people so shelters are bursting at the
seams overc capacity many people are
sleeping in the streets which is
increasingly worried ing as the weather
has transitioned here the last week uh
and gotten uh significantly colder uh
the rains have the rain season has
started and so you have issues around
people you know being exposed to the
elements flooding uh is a regular
occurrence in Gaza due to poor
infrastructure even before this
escalation so there are many concerns
about how to support these internally
displaced people and keep them keep them
protected from the elements let alone uh
Israeli air strikes and bombardments
many of those who've been displaced of
course are children uh talk to us about
conditions for them for children in Gaza
we know many have been killed and
injured but what about those that been
left orphaned by the fighting who's
going to care for
them you know Gaza is an is is a place
unlike any other that I've heard about
where they actually in the hospitals
have an acronym for um injured child uh
no surviving family and and it's it's
really unimaginable when you have people
whose entire families have been wiped
out how are you going to take care of
them we're now in a situation also where
we have this Communications blackout so
even the coordination of assistance for
these children is difficult prior to
this escalation uh save the children had
reported that 80% of children in Gaza
felt depressed and hopeless imagine how
how children in Gaza feel today we at at
the Norwegian Refugee Council were
working in schools providing
psychosocial support and training
teachers to help work with children who
had suffered trauma and displacement but
at this point we have an entire
population that's completely
traumatized Shena thank you very much
for talking with us that was Shaya low
with the Norwegian Refugee
Council